{{subpages}}

'''Anti-intellectualism''' is the opposition to intellectualism, intellectuals and the views and methods of intellectuals. It is possible to be consciously anti-intellectual, but more often than not, anti-intellectualism is a critical label or sub-conscious position.

There are arguably two separable aspects or strains of anti-intellectualism.  The rejection of the life of the mind is associated, on the one hand, with the spurning of Left intellectuals who have rejected conservative politics and traditional morality.  It is also associated, on the other hand, with the rejection of the usefulness of "trivial" facts and abstract thinking, the reading of old, irrelevant books, and spending time in schoolrooms instead of out in "the real world" getting experience.

Although anti-intellectualism is often accompanied by anti-rationalism, those discussing the former usually distinguish it from the latter. Such was the case with [[Richard Hofstadter]] in ''Anti-Intellectualism in American Life'', who omitted from this classic text on the topic discussion of intellectual self-critique or anti-rationalist ideas from within the academy.  Typically, those who go to the trouble of critiquing [[rationalism]] in its various forms are themselves intellectuals and very much part of the "life of the mind."

== Anti-intellectualism as a political, religious, and ethical phenomenon ==

Often fundamentalist religious movements or denominations are described as anti-intellectual, and while they do not tend to be opposed to intellectuals per se, they are criticized for discouraging independent thought. There is also a well-known strain of anti-intellectualism among far left movements, which led for example to [[the Killing Fields]]&mdash;the systematic slaughter of intellectuals&mdash;in [[Pol Pot]]'s Cambodia.  European [[Fascism]] was also famously anti-intellectual.

Many modern conservative movements in the [[United States]] and elsewhere are often seen as anti-intellectual&mdash;blaming academics and intellectuals for moral decay by promoting unorthodox ideas and morals (the Princeton ethicist [[Peter Singer]] is often accused thusly), or accusing intellectuals of wasting time and resources on abstract and irrelevant thought when they should be spending their time on more useful pursuits. Typical of this attitude may be the former British education secretary, [[Charles Clarke]], who thought that education for its own sake was "a bit dodgy" because it lacked vocational utility&mdash;students "need a relationship with the workplace".<ref>"[http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/education/2712833.stm Clarke criticised over classics]," BBC News</ref>

Being seen as "too intellectual" has been thought a political disadvantage in American politics for some time, and has been given as a reason for [[Al Gore|Al Gore's]] failure in the 2000 presidential election, [[John Kerry|Kerry's]] failure in 2004 and some commentators that the same may be true for [[Barack Obama]] in the forthcoming presidential elections.<ref>Jonathan Chait, [http://blogs.tnr.com/tnr/blogs/the_plank/archive/2008/03/18/obama-s-speech-and-one-singular-advantage-of-being-black.aspx Obama's Speech, and One (Singular) Advantage of Being Black], blog on ''The New Republic''<br />Eric Boehlert, [http://mediamatters.org/columns/200706120005 The media's assault on reason], Media Matters for America.</ref> Similarly, George W. Bush's populist appeal, in spite of his education at [[Yale University|Yale]] and [[Harvard Business School|Harvard]], has been considered my some commentators an appeal to voter's "resentment of brains."<ref>Todd Gitlin, "[http://chronicle.com/free/v47/i15/15b00701.htm The Renaissance of Anti-Intellectualism]", ''Chronicle of Higher Education'' December 8, 2000</ref> Before this, the presidential campaign by [[Adlai Stevenson]] and his 1952 defeat by [[Dwight D. Eisenhower]] is seen as a prime example of the political power of anti-intellectualism, and as the source of the term ''egghead'' (referring to Stevenson's bald head).

Anti-intellectuals, especially on the Right, often perceive intellectuals, especially on the Left, to be out-of-touch with common morality, elitist, immoral, often unorthodox in their religious beliefs, and sometimes sexually unorthodox&mdash;[[homosexuality|gay]], [[bisexuality|bisexual]], [[polygamy|polygamous]] or even [[asexuality|asexual]]. We can see a lot of this in the reaction to [[Bertrand Russell|Bertrand Russell's]] proposed appointment at City College in [[New York City]], where religious activists blocked Russell's employment at City College because of his liberal morals regarding sex and marriage, his pacifist opposition to the first and second World Wars and his [[atheism]].<ref>See Professor Edwards' discussion in the appendix to Bertrand Russell's ''Why I Am Not A Christian''; Thom Weidlich's ''Appointment Denied: The Inquisition of Bertrand Russell'' and [http://atheism.about.com/library/weekly/aa050300a.htm review of latter].</ref>

== Anti-intellectualism as a non-partisan phenomenon ==

Indeed, some of the whole 20th and 21st century narrative about intellectualism just maps "liberal egghead" sensibilities onto the intellectual label and "reactionary conservative" sensibilities onto the anti-intellectual label. It is well-known that most intellectuals have, for a long time, been politically on the left. Conservatives often conclude that such intellectuals use, twist, or invent the theories, arguments, and data to support policies that conservatives believe would be otherwise untenable.  But there have always been conservative intellectuals as well, scattered here and there, concentrated at a few [[religious university|religious universities]] and conservative [[think-tank]]s and [[political journal]]s.  And there have always been anti-intellectual people on the left.

So not all anti-intellectualism can be identified or associated with partisan politics or the moral attitudes associated with Left or Right.  A large part of American anti-intellectualism, as well as in other countries, is arguably not partisan at all, but is aimed at those who "think too much," "read too much," spend "too much" time in school.  [[Susan Jacoby]]--herself a liberal non-fiction writer--points this out at great length in her 2008 book, ''The Age of American Unreason.''

Therefore, the causes of anti-intellectualism are varied but include a belief in some forms of [[pragmatism]], whereby the intellectual is seen as irrelevant, since truth can be determined more through ''doing'' than thinking abstractly. Others see intellectuals as the embodiment of elitism, or as being opposed to the interests of the common people. Some combination of [[philistinism]], [[populism]], and belief in an elitist [[conspiracy theory|conspiracy]] probably best explains the phenomenon of anti-intellectualism.

== References ==
<references />