'''Bill Clinton''' (formally '''William Jefferson Clinton'''; born William Jefferson Blythe III) (1946-- ) was a Democratic president of the United States, elected in 1992 and 1996. Previously he served as governor of Arkansas. His administration was characterized by sustained prosperity, free trade internationally, the end of the [[New Deal]] welfare system, and an impeachment attempt that succeeded in the House but failed in the Senate. Known as a brilliant campaigner and policy wonk, as well as a womanizer, he became a very well paid speaker after leaving the White House. His wife, '''[[Hillary Clinton]]''' was elected to the Senate in 2000 from New York, reelected in 2006, and in 2007 was the frontrunner for the Democratic presidential nomination in 2008. Clinton has become a major fundraiser for his wife and has proven to be an effective campaigner with Blacks against her leading challenger, Senator [[Barak Obama]].

==Early Career==
Clinton was born August 19, 1946 in Hope, Arkansas, a month after his father William Jefferson Blythe III, a salesman, was killed in an auto accident. He was raised by his maternal grandparents until age 4, when his mother Virginia Kelly, a nurse, married Roger Clinton, a car dealer. Roger was an alcoholic and violent; the marriage was tempestuous, including a divorce and a remarriage in 1962. A life-long Southern Baptist, Clinton graduated from the Hot Springs public high school in 1964.  He attended the School of Foreign Service at Georgetown University in Washington D.C., where he became active in Democratic politics and won a prestigious Rhodes scholarship to Oxford University in England.  He was a bit player in the anti-Vietnam war movement, and managed to stall the draft until he received a high lottery number, an evasion that became controversial in his first presidential campaign. He attended Yale Law School (JD 1973). A hail fellow well met, Clinton developed a vast network of friends. He met [[Hillary Clinton]] at Yale; they married in 1975 and had one daughter, Chelsea in 1980.

==Election of 1992==
The Democratic Leadership Council (DLC) formed in early 1985 to formulate a moderate Democratic agenda. With [[Al From]] as executive director and Georgia Senator [[Sam Nunn]] as chairman, DLC comprised mostly Southern Democratic congressmen. They sought to rebuild the party's image after a series of defeats by Reagan and Bush. They wanted to assure voters that the moderate-conservative wing of the party was alive and well, and that its policy initiatives fit with mainstream American values. After the 1988 defeat, From asked Clinton in March 1990 to become the first DLC Chair from outside Washington. He and Clinton recruited state and local officials from around the country for the DLC, trying out some of the policy initiatives developed by the affiliated think tank the Progressive Policy Institute (PPI).  Proposals that found their way into Clinton's 1992 platform included:
* Apprenticeship programs for non-college-bound skilled workers 
* A program of national service for college students (with student loan forgiveness)
* A ROTC-style program to train new police officers in colleges
* An enhanced Earned Income Tax Credit for the working poor 
* Government-subsidized individual savings accounts for Social Security.

The two DLC manifestos and Clinton's 1991 "New Covenant" speech accounted for more than 60% of the promises in the 1992 Democratic platform. <ref> Borrelli, 432-35</ref>  Clinton campaigned as a "New Democrat," with an appeal to southerners and moderates that included demands for welfare reform and support for the death penalty.

==Domestic Policies==
Clinton's honeymoon with Congress was abruptly canceled when the issue of gay rights in the military exploded in his first days in office.  During the campaign Clinton had quietly promised gays and lesbians that he would end their exclusion from the military. The public debate forced Clinton to accept the military's compromise, called "Don't ask, don't tell," which remains in effect in 2007, and allows homosexuals to serve but penalizes them if they are openly gay.  However, by raising the issue Clinton did shift public opinion, which previously had been more hostile toward homosexuals.<ref> Michael Bailey; Lee Sigelman; Clyde Wilcox. "Presidential Persuasion on Social Issues: A Two-Way Street?" ''Political Research Quarterly,'' Vol. 56, No. 1. (Mar., 2003), pp. 49-58. [http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=1065-9129%28200303%2956%3A1%3C49%3APPOSIA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-F online at JSTOR]
</ref> 

One of Clinton's favorite programs was "AmeriCorps," modeled after the Peace Corps and the [[CCC]]. It sent 100,000 youth into paid public service jobs around the country. It was an expansion of a Bush program. 
===Health Care policies===
On 22 September 1993, Clinton called for a national medical care system that would incorporate the 15% of the population that was entitled to emergency care but lacked broader insurance. Polls showed strong initial support, but the 1994 elections shattered hopes for the passage of such a plan. Clinton decided on a plan using regional insurance purchasing agencies along with modest tax subsidies to combine universal coverage with cost efficiency. He and his advisors believed the plan would be acceptable to big business and the larger insurance companies, but the plan was opposed by a well-financed campaign. Skocpol (1996) suggests the major mistake may have been in emphasizing the cost-reducing aspect of the plan, not realizing that Americans were willing to pay for a government program that would provide generous benefits to them. The fear that Clinton's proposals would lead to the sort of health care rationing prevalent in Canada and other countries further troubled the voters. Starr (1997) notes that Clinton sought to achieve liberal ends of universal coverage through the conservative means of managed competition among private health plans, with a backup cap on the rate of growth in average insurance premiums. This approach had a political as well as policy rationale. It was meant to be the basis of an alliance that could include conservative Democrats and moderate Republicans and thereby achieve the majorities necessary for congressional passage. But what we saw as compromise, they did not -- especially as the very locus of the political center shifted to the right during the debate. Health care reform that seemed "inevitable" to many serious observers at the start became unthinkable by the end.

==National Security Policy==
Butfoy (2006) argues that in the 1990s the "revolution in military affairs" (RMA), which produced "smart" weapons like cruise missiles, came of age. This apparently transformed how America viewed the relationship between force and international relations. It looked as though technology was framing foreign policy. In particular, smart weapons enabled Clinton to combine risk minimization with an expanded security agenda. However, we should be wary of ascribing technological determinism to the conflicts of the 1990's dominated by Washington's flexing of its strategic superiority, such as its bombing of Belgrade. As shown by comparison with US strategy after the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks, Washington's stance in the 1990's was shaped by linkages between technology and specific political circumstances. As these circumstances changed, so did the RMA's place in US efforts to shape world order.
==1996 Election==
===Impeachment===
==Clinton voter Coalition==
===Public Opinion: Clinton's popularity===
Needham (2005) argues the "permanent campaign" is said to have reached its apogee in the incumbent communications strategies of Clinton and British Prime Minister [[Tony Blair]]. However, their assiduous courting of public opinion while in office has been used to explain both the high approval ratings of these leaders and their unpopularity for long periods of their incumbency. This apparent paradox suggests that the permanent campaign model is too blunt an instrument to usefully describe or evaluate incumbent communications. Its assumption of continuity between election campaigning and office-holding fails to explain how the strategic terrain changes once a challenger takes office. The concepts of branding and relationship marketing can be used to highlight the difference between gaining support in the one-off transaction of an election and retaining voter loyalty in a post-"purchase" setting. The success of Blair and Clinton in establishing a relationship with voters from within office can be assessed using six attributes of successful brands: simplicity, uniqueness, reassurance, aspiration, values, and credibility. As incumbents, facing challenges in shifting strategic and institutional environments, Blair and Clinton developed messages that were simple and appealed to voter aspirations. Voters remained skeptical about the extent to which these leaders embodied values and delivered on their promises.
  
==== Voter demographics ====

{| class=wikitable
! colspan="8" |The Presidential Vote in Social Groups (percentages)
|-
! rowspan="3" | ''% of<br />1996<br />total<br />vote''
|
| colspan="6" |''% of 3-party vote''
|-
|
| colspan="3" |''1992''
| colspan="3" |''1996''
|-
! ''Social group''
! ''Clinton''
! ''Bush''
! ''Perot''
! ''Clinton''
! ''Dole''
! ''Perot''
|-
|
| Total vote
| style="text-align:right;" | 43
| style="text-align:right;" | 38
| style="text-align:right;" | 19
| style="text-align:right;" | 49
| style="text-align:right;" | 41
| style="text-align:right;" | 8
|-
|
| '''Party and ideology'''
|
|
|
|
|
|
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 2
| Liberal Republicans
| style="text-align:right;" | 17
| style="text-align:right;" | 54
| style="text-align:right;" | 30
| style="text-align:right;" | 44
| style="text-align:right;" | 48
| style="text-align:right;" | 9
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 13
| Moderate Republicans
| style="text-align:right;" | 15
| style="text-align:right;" | 63
| style="text-align:right;" | 21
| style="text-align:right;" | 20
| style="text-align:right;" | 72
| style="text-align:right;" | 7
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 21
| Conservative Republicans
| style="text-align:right;" | 5
| style="text-align:right;" | 82
| style="text-align:right;" | 13
| style="text-align:right;" | 6
| style="text-align:right;" | 88
| style="text-align:right;" | 5
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 4
| Liberal Independents
| style="text-align:right;" | 54
| style="text-align:right;" | 17
| style="text-align:right;" | 30
| style="text-align:right;" | 58
| style="text-align:right;" | 15
| style="text-align:right;" | 18
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 15
| Moderate Independents
| style="text-align:right;" | 43
| style="text-align:right;" | 28
| style="text-align:right;" | 30
| style="text-align:right;" | 50
| style="text-align:right;" | 30
| style="text-align:right;" | 17
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 7
| Conservative Independents
| style="text-align:right;" | 17
| style="text-align:right;" | 53
| style="text-align:right;" | 30
| style="text-align:right;" | 19
| style="text-align:right;" | 60
| style="text-align:right;" | 19
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 13
| Liberal Democrats
| style="text-align:right;" | 85
| style="text-align:right;" | 5
| style="text-align:right;" | 11
| style="text-align:right;" | 89
| style="text-align:right;" | 5
| style="text-align:right;" | 4
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 20
| Moderate Democrats
| style="text-align:right;" | 76
| style="text-align:right;" | 9
| style="text-align:right;" | 15
| style="text-align:right;" | 84
| style="text-align:right;" | 10
| style="text-align:right;" | 5
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 6
| Conservative Democrats
| style="text-align:right;" | 61
| style="text-align:right;" | 23
| style="text-align:right;" | 16
| style="text-align:right;" | 69
| style="text-align:right;" | 23
| style="text-align:right;" | 7
|-
|
| '''Gender and marital status'''
|
|
|
|
|
|
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 33
| Married men
| style="text-align:right;" | 38
| style="text-align:right;" | 42
| style="text-align:right;" | 21
| style="text-align:right;" | 40
| style="text-align:right;" | 48
| style="text-align:right;" | 10
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 33
| Married women
| style="text-align:right;" | 41
| style="text-align:right;" | 40
| style="text-align:right;" | 19
| style="text-align:right;" | 48
| style="text-align:right;" | 43
| style="text-align:right;" | 7
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 15
| Unmarried men
| style="text-align:right;" | 48
| style="text-align:right;" | 29
| style="text-align:right;" | 22
| style="text-align:right;" | 49
| style="text-align:right;" | 35
| style="text-align:right;" | 12
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 20
| Unmarried women
| style="text-align:right;" | 53
| style="text-align:right;" | 31
| style="text-align:right;" | 15
| style="text-align:right;" | 62
| style="text-align:right;" | 28
| style="text-align:right;" | 7
|-
|
| '''Race'''
|
|
|
|
|
|
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 83
| White
| style="text-align:right;" | 39
| style="text-align:right;" | 40
| style="text-align:right;" | 20
| style="text-align:right;" | 43
| style="text-align:right;" | 46
| style="text-align:right;" | 9
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 10
| Black
| style="text-align:right;" | 83
| style="text-align:right;" | 10
| style="text-align:right;" | 7
| style="text-align:right;" | 84
| style="text-align:right;" | 12
| style="text-align:right;" | 4
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 5
| Hispanic
| style="text-align:right;" | 61
| style="text-align:right;" | 25
| style="text-align:right;" | 14
| style="text-align:right;" | 72
| style="text-align:right;" | 21
| style="text-align:right;" | 6
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 1
| Asian
| style="text-align:right;" | 31
| style="text-align:right;" | 55
| style="text-align:right;" | 15
| style="text-align:right;" | 43
| style="text-align:right;" | 48
| style="text-align:right;" | 8
|-
|
| '''Religion'''
|
|
|
|
|
|
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 46
| White Protestant
| style="text-align:right;" | 33
| style="text-align:right;" | 47
| style="text-align:right;" | 21
| style="text-align:right;" | 36
| style="text-align:right;" | 53
| style="text-align:right;" | 10
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 29
| Catholic
| style="text-align:right;" | 44
| style="text-align:right;" | 35
| style="text-align:right;" | 20
| style="text-align:right;" | 53
| style="text-align:right;" | 37
| style="text-align:right;" | 9
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 3
| Jewish
| style="text-align:right;" | 80
| style="text-align:right;" | 11
| style="text-align:right;" | 9
| style="text-align:right;" | 78
| style="text-align:right;" | 16
| style="text-align:right;" | 3
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 17
| Born Again, religious right
| style="text-align:right;" | 23
| style="text-align:right;" | 61
| style="text-align:right;" | 15
| style="text-align:right;" | 26
| style="text-align:right;" | 65
| style="text-align:right;" | 8
|-
|
| '''Age'''
|
|
|
|
|
|
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 17
| 18–29 years old
| style="text-align:right;" | 43
| style="text-align:right;" | 34
| style="text-align:right;" | 22
| style="text-align:right;" | 53
| style="text-align:right;" | 34
| style="text-align:right;" | 10
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 33
| 30–44 years old
| style="text-align:right;" | 41
| style="text-align:right;" | 38
| style="text-align:right;" | 21
| style="text-align:right;" | 48
| style="text-align:right;" | 41
| style="text-align:right;" | 9
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 26
| 45–59 years old
| style="text-align:right;" | 41
| style="text-align:right;" | 40
| style="text-align:right;" | 19
| style="text-align:right;" | 48
| style="text-align:right;" | 41
| style="text-align:right;" | 9
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 24
| 60 and older
| style="text-align:right;" | 50
| style="text-align:right;" | 38
| style="text-align:right;" | 12
| style="text-align:right;" | 48
| style="text-align:right;" | 44
| style="text-align:right;" | 7
|-
|
| '''Education'''
|
|
|
|
|
|
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 6
| Not a high school graduate
| style="text-align:right;" | 54
| style="text-align:right;" | 28
| style="text-align:right;" | 18
| style="text-align:right;" | 59
| style="text-align:right;" | 28
| style="text-align:right;" | 11
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 24
| High school graduate
| style="text-align:right;" | 43
| style="text-align:right;" | 36
| style="text-align:right;" | 21
| style="text-align:right;" | 51
| style="text-align:right;" | 35
| style="text-align:right;" | 13
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 27
| Some college education
| style="text-align:right;" | 41
| style="text-align:right;" | 37
| style="text-align:right;" | 21
| style="text-align:right;" | 48
| style="text-align:right;" | 40
| style="text-align:right;" | 10
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 26
| College graduate
| style="text-align:right;" | 39
| style="text-align:right;" | 41
| style="text-align:right;" | 20
| style="text-align:right;" | 44
| style="text-align:right;" | 46
| style="text-align:right;" | 8
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 17
| Post graduate education
| style="text-align:right;" | 50
| style="text-align:right;" | 36
| style="text-align:right;" | 14
| style="text-align:right;" | 52
| style="text-align:right;" | 40
| style="text-align:right;" | 5
|-
|
| '''Family income'''
|
|
|
|
|
|
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 11
| Under $15,000
| style="text-align:right;" | 58
| style="text-align:right;" | 23
| style="text-align:right;" | 19
| style="text-align:right;" | 59
| style="text-align:right;" | 28
| style="text-align:right;" | 11
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 23
| $15,000–$29,999
| style="text-align:right;" | 45
| style="text-align:right;" | 35
| style="text-align:right;" | 20
| style="text-align:right;" | 53
| style="text-align:right;" | 36
| style="text-align:right;" | 9
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 27
| $30,000–$49,999
| style="text-align:right;" | 41
| style="text-align:right;" | 38
| style="text-align:right;" | 21
| style="text-align:right;" | 48
| style="text-align:right;" | 40
| style="text-align:right;" | 10
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 39
| Over $50,000
| style="text-align:right;" | 39
| style="text-align:right;" | 44
| style="text-align:right;" | 17
| style="text-align:right;" | 44
| style="text-align:right;" | 48
| style="text-align:right;" | 7
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 18
| Over $75,000
| style="text-align:right;" | 36
| style="text-align:right;" | 48
| style="text-align:right;" | 16
| style="text-align:right;" | 41
| style="text-align:right;" | 51
| style="text-align:right;" | 7
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 9
| Over $100,000
| style="text-align:right;" | —
| style="text-align:right;" | —
| style="text-align:right;" | —
| style="text-align:right;" | 38
| style="text-align:right;" | 54
| style="text-align:right;" | 6
|-
|
| '''Region'''
|
|
|
|
|
|
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 23
| East
| style="text-align:right;" | 47
| style="text-align:right;" | 35
| style="text-align:right;" | 18
| style="text-align:right;" | 55
| style="text-align:right;" | 34
| style="text-align:right;" | 9
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 26
| Midwest
| style="text-align:right;" | 42
| style="text-align:right;" | 37
| style="text-align:right;" | 21
| style="text-align:right;" | 48
| style="text-align:right;" | 41
| style="text-align:right;" | 10
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 30
| South
| style="text-align:right;" | 41
| style="text-align:right;" | 43
| style="text-align:right;" | 16
| style="text-align:right;" | 46
| style="text-align:right;" | 46
| style="text-align:right;" | 7
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 20
| West
| style="text-align:right;" | 43
| style="text-align:right;" | 34
| style="text-align:right;" | 23
| style="text-align:right;" | 48
| style="text-align:right;" | 40
| style="text-align:right;" | 8
|-
|
| '''Community size'''
|
|
|
|
|
|
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 10
| Population over 500,000
| style="text-align:right;" | 58
| style="text-align:right;" | 28
| style="text-align:right;" | 13
| style="text-align:right;" | 68
| style="text-align:right;" | 25
| style="text-align:right;" | 6
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 21
| Population 50,000 to 500,000
| style="text-align:right;" | 50
| style="text-align:right;" | 33
| style="text-align:right;" | 16
| style="text-align:right;" | 50
| style="text-align:right;" | 39
| style="text-align:right;" | 8
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 39
| Suburbs
| style="text-align:right;" | 41
| style="text-align:right;" | 39
| style="text-align:right;" | 21
| style="text-align:right;" | 47
| style="text-align:right;" | 42
| style="text-align:right;" | 8
|-
| style="text-align:right;" | 30
| Rural areas, towns
| style="text-align:right;" | 39
| style="text-align:right;" | 40
| style="text-align:right;" | 20
| style="text-align:right;" | 45
| style="text-align:right;" | 44
| style="text-align:right;" | 10
|}
'''Source:''' Voter News Service exit poll, reported in ''The New York Times'', November 10, 1996, p. 28.

==Bibliography==
===Biographical and Presidential===
* Berman, William C. ''From the Center to the Edge: The Politics and Policies of the Clinton Presidency'' (2001) 160pp 
* Campbell, Colin, and Bert A. Rockman, eds. ''The Clinton Legacy'' 348 pp [http://www.questia.com/PM.qst?a=o&d=58143940 online edition]
*  Congressional Quarterly. ''Congress and the Nation 1993-1997: A Review of Government and Politics: 103rd and 104th Congresses'' (1998); ''Congress and the Nation 1997-2001: A Review of Government and Politics: 105th and 106th Congresses'' (2002). Highly detailed nonpartisan coverage (1200 pp each) of all political issues, including presidency
* Harris, John F.  ''The Survivor: Bill Clinton in the White House'' (2005) ISBN 0-375-50847-3
* Klein, Joe.  ''The Natural: The Misunderstood Presidency of Bill Clinton'' (2003) ISBN 0-7679-1412-0
* Levy, Peter. ''Encyclopedia of the Clinton Presidency'' (2002), 400pp; 230 articles
* Schantz, Harvey L. ''Politics in an Era of Divided Government: Elections and Goverance in the Second Clinton Administration'' (2001) [http://www.questia.com/PM.qst?a=o&d=102246366 online edition]
*  Schier, Steven E. ''The Postmodern Presidency: Bill Clinton's Legacy in U.S. Politics'' (2000) 
 
===Pre presidential===
* Abbott, Philip. "A 'Long and Winding Road': Bill Clinton and the 1960s," Rhetoric & Public Affairs 9.1 (2006) 1-20 in Project Muse
* Borrelli, Stephen A. "Finding the Third Way: Bill Clinton, the DLC, and the Democratic Platform of 1992," ''Journal of Policy History'' Vol. 13#4 (2001), pp. 429-462 in Project Muse
* Maraniss, David,  ''First in His Class: A Biography of Bill Clinton'' (1996) ISBN 0-684-81890-6. Biography to 1991.

===Foreign Policy===
* Butfoy, Andrew. "The Rise and Fall of Missile Diplomacy? President Clinton and the 'Revolution in Military Affairs' in Retrospect." ''Australian Journal of Politics and History'' 2006 52(1): 98-114. Issn: 0004-9522 Fulltext: in Ebsco 
*  Cohen, Warren I.  ''America's Failing Empire: U.S. Foreign Relations since the Cold War.'' 2005. 204 pp.  
* Davis; John. "The Evolution of American Grand Strategy and the War on Terrorism: Clinton and Bush Perspectives" ''White House Studies'', Vol. 3, 2003
* Hendrickson, Ryan C. ''The Clinton Wars: The Constitution, Congress, and War Powers'' (2002)
* Hyland, William G. ''Clinton's World: Remaking American Foreign Policy'' (1999) ISBN 0-275-96396-9 [http://www.questia.com/PM.qst?a=o&d=14147621 online edition]
* Jewett, Aubrey W. and Marc D. Turetzky; " Stability and Change in President Clinton's Foreign Policy Beliefs, 1993-96" ''Presidential Studies Quarterly'', Vol. 28, 1998
* Livingston, C. Don, Kenneth A. Wink; "The Passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement in the U.S. House of Representatives: Presidential Leadership or Presidential Luck?" ''Presidential Studies Quarterly'', Vol. 27, 1997


===Domestic Policy===
* Edwards; George C. "Bill Clinton and His Crisis of Governance" ''Presidential Studies Quarterly,'' Vol. 28, 1998
* Fisher; Patrick. "Clinton's Greatest Legislative Achievement? the Success of the 1993 Budget Reconciliation Bill" ''White House Studies'', Vol. 1, 2001
* Harris, John F. ''The Survivor: Bill Clinton in the White House''. (2005) ISBN 0-375-50847-3, biography
* Lanoue, David J. and Craig F. Emmert; "Voting in the Glare of the Spotlight: Representatives' Votes on the Impeachment of President Clinton" ''Polity'', Vol. 32, 1999
* Needham, Catherine. "Brand Leaders: Clinton, Blair and the Limitations of the Permanent Campaign." ''Political Studies'' 2005 53(2): 343-361. Issn: 0032-3217 Fulltext: in Ebsco 
* Nie; Martin A. "'It's the Environment, Stupid!': Clinton and the Environment" ''Presidential Studies Quarterly'', Vol. 27, 1997 [http://www.questia.com/googleScholar.qst?docId=5001516576 online edition]
* Patterson, James T.  ''Restless Giant: The United States from Watergate to Bush vs. Gore'' (2nd ed 2007)
* Poveda; Tony G. "Clinton, Crime, and the Justice Department" ''Social Justice'', Vol. 21, 1994  [http://www.questia.com/PM.qst?a=o&se=gglsc&d=5000301618 online edition]
* Renshon; Stanley A. ''The Clinton Presidency: Campaigning, Governing, and the Psychology of Leadership'' Westview Press, 1995
* Schantz, Harvey L. ''Politics in an Era of Divided Government: Elections and Governance in the Second Clinton Administration'' (2001) ISBN 0-8153-3583-0
* Wattenberg; Martin P. "The Democrats' Decline in the House during the Clinton Presidency: An Analysis of Partisan Swings" ''Presidential Studies Quarterly'', Vol. 29, 1999

===Polls, images, character===
* Cohen; Jeffrey E. "The Polls: Change and Stability in Public Assessments of Personal Traits, Bill Clinton, 1993-99" ''Presidential Studies Quarterly'', Vol. 31, 2001
* Cronin, Thomas E. and Michael A. Genovese; "President Clinton and Character Questions" ''Presidential Studies Quarterly'' Vol. 28, 1998
* Glad; Betty. "Evaluating Presidential Character" ''Presidential Studies Quarterly'', Vol. 28, 1998 [http://www.questia.com/PM.qst?a=o&se=gglsc&d=5001393536 online edition]
* Maurer; Paul J. "Media Feeding Frenzies: Press Behavior during Two Clinton Scandals" ''Presidential Studies Quarterly,'' Vol. 29, 1999 [http://www.questia.com/PM.qst?a=o&se=gglsc&d=5001239881 online edition]
* O'Connor; Brendon. "Policies, Principles, and Polls: Bill Clinton's Third Way Welfare Politics 1992-1996" ''The Australian Journal of Politics and History'', Vol. 48, 2002
* Posner, Richard A.  ''An Affair of State: The Investigation, Impeachment, and Trial of President Clinton'' (1999) ISBN 0-674-00080-3 [http://www.questia.com/PM.qst?a=o&d=77420690 online edition]
* Renshon; Stanley A. "The Polls: The Public's Response to the Clinton Scandals, Part 1: Inconsistent Theories, Contradictory Evidence" ''Presidential Studies Quarterly'', Vol. 32, 2002 [http://www.questia.com/PM.qst?a=o&d=5000773179 online edition]
* Michael Waldman ''POTUS Speaks: Finding the Words That Defined the Clinton Presidency'' (2000) ISBN 0-7432-0020-9
* Wattier; Mark J. "The Clinton Factor: The Effects of Clinton's Personal Image in 2000 Presidential Primaries and in the General Election" ''White House Studies'', Vol. 4, 2004

===Health reform===
* Johnson, Fard. "Politics, Propaganda and Public Opinion: The Influence of Race and Class on the 1993 - 1994 Health Care Reform Debate." (2004). ISBN 1-4116-6345-4
* Laham, Nicholas, ''A Lost Cause: Bill Clinton's Campaign for National Health Insurance'' (1996) [http://www.questia.com/library/book/a-lost-cause-bill-clintons-campaign-for-national-health-insurance-by-nicholas-laham.jsp online edition]
* Rushefsky, Mark E. and Kant Patel. ''Politics, Power & Policy Making: The Case of Health Care Reform in the 1990s'' (1998) ISBN 1-56324-956-1
* Skocpol, Theda.  ''Boomerang: Clinton's Health Security Effort and the Turn Against Government in U.S. Politics,'' 1996.

===Memoirs===
* Clinton, Bill. ''My Life''. (2004). ISBN 0-375-41457-6.
* Sidney Blumenthal ''The Clinton Wars''. (2003). ISBN 0-374-12502-3
* Kenneth Starr. ''The Starr Report: The Findings of Independent Counsel Kenneth W. Starr on President Clinton and the Lewinsky Affair'' (1998) ISBN 1-891620-24-X
* George Stephanopoulos. ''All Too Human: A Political Education'' (1998) ISBN 0-316-92919-0

== External links ==
*[http://www.millercenter.virginia.edu/index.php/academic/americanpresident/clinton Extensive essay on Bill Clinton and shorter essays on each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs]
*[http://millercenter.virginia.edu/scripps/digitalarchive/speechDetail/34 Full audio of a number of Clinton speeches via the Miller Center of Public Affairs (UVa)]
* [http://www.whitehouse.gov/history/presidents/bc42.html White House biography]
* [http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ William J. Clinton Foundation] official website
* [http://www.clintonglobalinitiative.org Clinton Global Initiative] official website
* [http://www.clintonlibrary.gov/ Clinton Presidential Library] official website
* [http://clinton6.nara.gov/ Clinton Presidential Materials Project] Archive of press releases and transcripts of speeches from the administration.
* [http://www.clintonschool.uasys.edu/ Clinton School of Public Service]


==Footnotes==
<references/>

[[Category:History Workgroup|Clinton, Bill]]
[[Category:Politics Workgroup|Clinton, Bill]]
[[Category:Topic Informant Workgroup|Clinton, Bill]]
[[Category:CZ Live|Clinton, Bill]]