{{subpages}}
'''Christianity''' is the largest [[religion]] in the world, with over two billion adherents,<ref name="isbn0195079639 ">{{cite book |author=Johnson, Todd M.; Barrett, David B.; Kurian, George Thomas |title=World Christian encyclopedia: a comparative survey of churches and religions in the modern world |publisher=Oxford University Press |location=Oxford [Oxfordshire] |year=2001 |pages= |isbn=0195079639 |oclc= |doi=}}</ref> roughly one-third of humanity, and is made up of a large set of traditions originating in first-century [[Palestine]] with the philosophy and teachings of [[Jesus Christ]]. As an historical and [[Theology|theological]] offspring of [[Judaism]], the early Christian community incorporated the [[Old Testament|Jewish scriptures]] into their [[Bible]] and the relationship between the Jewish and Christian traditions remains complex and multifaceted. Christianity is a [[Monotheism|monotheistic]] faith that teaches that [[God]] is made up of three [[person]]s sharing a single [[essence]] (this teaching is known as [[Trinitarianism]]), and that His will for the world has been revealed in the Bible, a book made up of several dozen pieces of literature composed over 2,000 years.

==Theology==
Christian theology centers around several main beliefs. Christianity is monotheistic; that is, Christians believe in one God, who is in three persons, the Father, Son, and [[Holy Spirit]]. This God is understood to be identical to the Jewish understanding of God in the earlier portions of the Bible. Christians believe that Jesus was both fully human and fully divine. Christianity asserts that God is ethically perfect, or holy, and that God is immutable; that is, God does not change<ref> Theologians quote James 1:17, "the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning." See [http://books.google.com/books?id=0TEkThdhYcIC&pg=PA390&dq=theology+%22with+whom+is+no+variableness%22&lr=&num=30&as_brr=0&ei=HPaRR9bbEpu4sgPYgu1I Charles Hodge, ''Systematic Theology'' (1873) p. 390 online]
</ref>.  

Romanticism was a search for feeling and an exploration of the inner so. Nowhere was this more true than in theology, where the German theologian [[Friedrich Schleiermacher]] (1768–1834) reshaped liberal Protestant thought. Traditionally theologians pondered the infinity and omnipotence of God.  That was less relevant, argued Schleiermacher, than the inner feeling of a person of absolute dependence upon God, and the intuition of God's presence.  Blessedness, he taught, consists in the strengthening of the God-consciousness through the community of believers (the Church); [[sin]] is the obscuring of this consciousness. Jesus Christ shared the humanity of all human beings but was unique in the strength and constancy of his God-[[consciousness]].<ref> Peter Heltzel, "Friedrich Schleiermacher: The Father of Modern Protestant Theology," (1998) [http://people.bu.edu/wwildman/WeirdWildWeb/courses/mwt/dictionary/mwt_themes_470_schleiermacher.htm#Friedrich%20Schleiermacher:%20The%20Father%20of%20Modern%20Protestant%20Theology online]</ref> 

[[Karl Barth]] reacted against 20th-century [[Liberalism|liberal]] thought and the innerness of God, and insisted on God's transcendence. Barth stressed the discontinuity between the Christian message and the world. God is the wholly other, He is known only in His revelation, and He is not the patron saint of culture, but its judge.<ref> [http://theologytoday.ptsem.edu/jul1966/v23-2-article3.htm Robert H. King, "Models Of God's Transcendence," ''Theology Today'' 23#2 (July 1966  p 200+]; see also [http://books.google.com/books?id=0TEkThdhYcIC&pg=PA390&dq=theology+%22with+whom+is+no+variableness%22&lr=&num=30&as_brr=0&ei=HPaRR9bbEpu4sgPYgu1I#PPA395,M1 Charles Hodge, ''Systematic Theology'' (1873) p. 395 online] </ref> 

==Soteriology==
[[Soteriology]] is the theology of salvation. Christians believe that, as a result of the fall of [[Adam]] and [[Eve]] in the [[Garden of Eden]], all humans are sinful. Because of this "sinful nature", all people are not in a proper relationship with God, possibly doomed to be condemned to [[Hell]] for breaking God's command<ref>Theologians cite Romans 3:23 "for all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God" (New International Version).</ref>. However, Christian soteriology asserts that Christ came to [[Earth]] as a human being, and was killed to take the punishment for man's sin. Christians believe that a person must accept God's forgiveness, and if they do so, that they are allowed to go to heaven.<ref>Theologians cite Romans 10:9-10 "That if you confess with your mouth, "Jesus is Lord," and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved. For it is with your heart that you believe and are justified, and it is with your mouth that you confess and are saved."</ref>. Most Protestants today agree that salvation is "by grace alone", meaning that a person is not required to do good works to get into heaven, although good works will generally be a by-product of salvation.

==Eschatology==
[[Eschatology]] is the study of "last things," or beliefs about the end of the world and the [[afterlife]]. Christians believe that after Christ was crucified, he [[Resurrection|resurrected]] from the dead (the origin of the celebration of [[Easter]]), that he later ascended to [[Heaven]], and he will return to Earth.

The Hebrew and Christian scriptures both have a wide body of work known as [[prophecy]], which purports to predict the future. However, because prophetic literature is highly symbolic, there is very wide disagreement among Christian scholars about how exactly the end of the world will come about. The disagreement tends to focus on when exactly Christ will return to Earth, and whether the book of [[Book of Revelation]] is primarily about past, current, or future events, or whether it should be interpreted as metaphor.

A recurring theme in the [[history of Christianity]] is that, in every age, there are Christians who believe that the eschatological pronouncements of the Bible apply to that point in history. Interestingly, this tendency even existed with the earliest Christians. In 1 Corinthians 7, the apostle [[Paul]] urges his followers not to worry too much about their present state of affairs: "I mean, brothers and sisters, the appointed time has grown short... For the present form of the world is passing away" (1 Cor. 7:29-31, trans. NRSV)-- a statement most scholars take to mean that Paul believed the return of Christ (and perhaps the end of the world) was immanent.<ref>cf. Paul, by E.P. Sanders, Oxford University Press, 1991, p. 32 ff.</ref>

==Denominational taxonomy==
Christianity has developed into a variety of traditions and ecclesiastical bodies over the past 2,000 years. The broadest division is between [[Eastern Christianity|Eastern]] and [[Western Christianity]], two families that come from historical differences between the the [[Greek]]-speaking [[Byzantine Empire]] and [[Latin]]-speaking [[Roman Empire]]. The Eastern traditions are primarily made up of the [[Eastern Orthodox Church]] and the [[Oriental Orthodox Church]], two associations of national churches in communion (although not with one another.) The Western faiths trace their heritage through direct descent, [[Reformation]], or [[Missionary|missionizing]] from the Roman church and include [[Catholicism]], [[Protestantism]], and [[Anglicanism]], as well as a variety of splinter groups such as the Mormons.

In addition, there are hundreds of millions of independent Christians - many in the [[United States]]; sub-Saharan [[Africa]], where the [[Pentecostalism|Pentecostal]] movement has been influential; and in [[mainland China]] - that have a legacy of some Protestant history, but are not formally associated with a church authority. Some churches from the East have formally joined the Catholic faith, and are historically and culturally Eastern, but ecclesiastically Western.

===Eastern Christianity===
====[[Eastern Orthodox Church|Eastern Orthodox]]====
The Eastern Orthodox Church is made up of approximately 17 national churches - the numbering can differ depending on one's perspective on the [[Orthodox Church in America]]. These national churches are all in [[communion]] with one another and none of them have any ecclesiastical authority over one another, although they all recognize the special place of the [[Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople]] as ''primus inter pares'' or "first among equals." These independent churches are called autocephalous and several smaller churches are autonomous and under the authority of autocephalous bodies.

Eastern Orthodoxy and Roman Catholicism were in communion with one another until the [[East-West Schism]] or Great Schism of 1054, in which the Ecumenical Patriarch and [[Pope]] [[Excommunication|excommunicated]] one another. The differences between the two bodies had been building for centuries: the East used Greek as a [[liturgical language]], the West used Latin; Easterners emphasized [[monasticism]], [[mysticism]], and [[negative theology]] to experience God, whereas Westerners focused on [[Reason|rationalistic]] explanations and formalized [[doctrine]]s.

====Oriental Orthodox====
The Oriental Orthodox Church is more loosely affiliated culturally than the Eastern Orthodox, but the role of the [[Coptic Pope]] is stronger ecclesiastically than the Ecumenical Patriarch. The Oriental Orthodox ceased to be in communion with the rest of Christianity after the [[Council of Chalcedon]] in [[451]] and the resulting [[Chalcedonian Creed]] which established a particular formula for understanding how Jesus can be both divine and human in full measure. The [[Christology]] of the Orientals has been labeled [[Monophysitism|monophysite]], but the Church defines itself as [[Miaphysitism|miaphysite]] - the differences go back to the original Christological controversy of the fifth century, with the former denying that Jesus had any substantial [[human nature]]. Similar to the Easterners, Orientals use [[icon]]s in worship, have a strong monastic tradition, and have focused on the lives of [[saint]]s for spiritual guidance.

====Assyrian====
The [[Assyrian Church of the East]] became a separate body after the [[Council of Ephesus]] in 431, a gathering of Christians to combat the [[heresy|heretical]] group lead by [[Nestorius]]. This was another Christological controversy and consequently, the Assyrians have been dubbed Nestorian by outsiders, but maintain that their understanding of Jesus' natures is not and has never been Nestorian. In the mid-sixteenth century, several churches broke communion with the Patriarch of Babylon, spiritual head of the Church of the East and joined into communion with the Catholic Church becoming the [[Eastern Catholicism|Eastern Catholic]] [[Chaldean Rite]]. Due to political instability in [[Iraq]] and [[Assyrian]] immigration, the church is headquartered in [[Chicago]], the [[United States]].

====Eastern Rite====
While the [[Latin Rite]] of Catholicism makes up over 98% of the believers in the Catholic Church, there are 15 Eastern Rites which are allowed to conduct their own [[liturgy]] and maintain many of their own distinct doctrines and practices while acknowledging the [[primacy of the Bishop of Rome]], as an authoritative head to their church as well.

===Western Christianity===
====Catholicism====
{{Main|Roman Catholic Church}}
Catholicism is the largest denominational family amongst Christians, and the Roman Catholic Church is the largest institution of any kind on the face of the Earth, largely due to missiological efforts in [[Latin America]]. In addition to believers who are the product of [[Portuguese colonialism|Portuguese]] and [[Spanish colonialism]], Catholicism has a strong history in [[Western Europe]], where it remained virtually the sole church in the West from the time of the Schism through the Reformations of the 15th and 16th centuries.

The Catholic Church is united by several distinct traditions, possibly the most important of which is the [[Pope]] - [[Bishop]] of [[Rome]] and the [[monarch]] of [[Vatican City]]. The Pope's [[ecclesiastical see]] is known as the [[Holy See]] and is given a priority in terms of both honor and authority amongst all other Catholic bishops. Catholics have rich traditions of doctrine, [[canon law]], sainthood, and [[sacred architecture]].

====Protestantism====
[[Protestantism]] is not a single church body or set of formally-related organizations, but a grouping of various church families whose history extends to the [[Reformation]]s in 16th century Europe. The main families are the [[Lutheranism|Lutheran]], the [[Reformed Christianity|Reformed]] and [[Presbyterianism|Presbyterians]], and the [[Anabaptists]]. Protestantism has spread as widely across the globe as has Catholicism, and has developed into a wide variety of national expressions as well as being foundational in international [[Ecumenism|ecumenical]] movements such as the [[World Council of Churches]].

Certain pre-Reformation groups are frequently included in discussions about Protestantism, such as [[Waldensians]] and [[Moravians]], who are legacies of reformation movements lead by [[Peter Waldo]] in 12th-century Italy and [[Jan Hus]] in 15th-century [[Bohemia]]. Some classification systems also include Anglicans as well, as the [[Church of England]] and the [[Roman Catholic Church]] ceased to be in communion roughly concurrent with the Reformation. Since the Reformation, large Protestant groups include [[Baptists]], [[Methodism|Methodists]], the [[Disciples of Christ]], and [[Adventism|Adventist]] churches that come from the [[Resorationism|Restorationist]] movement of mid-18th century America. Some of most particular Christian groups come from the latter movement, including [[Mormons]] and the [[Jehovah's Witnesses]]. Depending on the definition of what constitutes Christianity, those movements may not even be considered Christian due to their unique understandings of virtually every Christian doctrine.

====Anglicanism====
Anglicanism is a form of Christianity with commonalities with both Protestantism and Catholicism. The Anglican Church was formed by [[Henry VIII]] at roughly the same time as the self-definition of Protestantism, and there are some commonalities between Protestantism and Anglicanism. The [[Church of England]] ceased to be in communion with Rome as a result of Henry's actions and his insistence that the [[King of England]] be head of the British church. At the same time, the emphasis on ritual and liturgy in the Roman Catholic Church is also found, to some extent, in the Anglican Church. Anglicans also stress the common lineage their clergy have with Catholics - a doctrine known as [[apostolic succession]], which ties present-day religious workers with the original twelve [[apostles]] of Jesus.

====Independent churches====
Some churches that do not identify with any denomination. [[Charismatic Christianity]] and [[Pentecostalism]] are two similar movements founded in the twentieth century which prioritize an individual's experience of God through the Holy Spirit, including the reception of spiritual gifts such as [[glossolalia]], [[spiritual healing]], and [[prophecy]]. Charismatics have generally stayed within their original church bodies, whereas Pentecostals have created their own denominations and separate churches. These bodies are particularly prevalent in Africa.

[[Evangelicalism]] is another movement that exist both with established church groups and entirely independent churches, some of which have evolved out of small [[house church]]es and private [[Bible study]] groups into larger networks of churches, particularly in America. Evangelicals are similar to [[Fundamentalism|fundamentalists]] in some of their emphasis on the priority of the Bible, but are not as hostile to [[modernity]] nor mainstream [[politics]]. They have also been associated with a [[social Gospel]] in their insistence on providing services to underprivileged populations, particularly through missions work.

Both of these movements are Western although they have typically do not have formal ties to other historically Western churches.

===Ecumenism===
Another important cross-denominational movement in the 20th century has been ecumenism: a cooperation of Christian bodies that can be as simple as coordinating common efforts in social services, writing common theological statements, the restoration of communion between bodies, and even the creation of entirely new denominations themselves, such as the [[Uniting Churches]]. The [[World Council of Churches]] (WCC) is an international body whose membership includes a majority of the Christian world if one includes Catholicism (the Roman Catholic Church is not a member of the WCC, but works with it closely on several initiatives.) The [[National Council of Churches]] is an American equivalent that has similar goals as the WCC.

==Notes==
{{Reflist}}

==Bibliography==
*Brauer, Jerald C. ''The Westminster Dictionary of Church History'' (1971), 880pp
*Briggs, J. H. Y., Robert D. Linder, and David F. Wright. ''Introduction to the History of Christianity: First Century to the Present Day'' (2006) [http://www.amazon.com/Introduction-History-Christianity-Century-Present/dp/0800638123/ref=sr_1_4?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1200823548&sr=8-4 excerpt and text search] 
*Cross, F. L., and E. A. Livingstone, eds. ''The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church''  (3rd ed. 1997), 1840pp; [http://www.amazon.com/Oxford-Dictionary-Christian-Church/dp/0192802909/ref=pd_bxgy_b_text_b excerpt and text search]; online at [[OUP]]
*Gonzalez, Justo L. '' A History of Christian Thought: Volume 1: From the Beginnings to the Council of Chalcedon'' (2nd ed. 1987); [http://www.amazon.com/History-Christian-Thought-Beginnings-Chalcedon/dp/0687171822/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1200823941&sr=8-1 excerpt and text search vol 1]; ''A History of Christian Thought: Volume 2: From Augustine to the Eve of the Reformation'' (2nd ed. 1987) [http://www.amazon.com/History-Christian-Thought-Augustine-Reformation/dp/0687171830/ref=sr_1_3?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1200823941&sr=8-3 excerpt and text search vol 2]; ''A History of Christian Thought: Volume 3: From the Protestant Reformation to the Twentieth Century'' (1987) [http://www.amazon.com/History-Christian-Thought-Protestant-Reformation/dp/0687171849/ref=sr_1_12?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1200808706&sr=8-12 excerpt and text search vol 3]
*Hastings, Adrian et al. eds. ''The Oxford Companion to Christian Thought'' (2000) 808pp; 600 articles by 260 Catholic, Protestand and Orthodox scholars; [http://www.amazon.com/gp/reader/0198600240/ref=sib_dp_pt/105-4292297-2766841#reader-link excerpt and text search]; online at [[OUP]]
*Horsley, Richard A. ''Christian Origins: A People's History Of Christianity, Vol. 1'' (2006), 318pp [http://www.amazon.com/Christian-Origins-Peoples-History-Christianity/dp/080063411X/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1200886474&sr=1-2 excerpt and text search]
*Latourette, Kenneth Scott. ''A History of Christianity'' (2 vol 1975) [http://www.amazon.com/History-Christianity-Beginnings-1500-Revised/dp/0060649526/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1200823548&sr=8-1 excerpt and text search vol 1, to 1500]
*Latourette, Kenneth Scott. ''A history of the expansion of Christianity'' (7 vol 1939-1970), monumental history of missionary work worldwide
*MacCulloch, Diarmaid. ''The Reformation'' (2005), influential recent survey [http://www.amazon.com/Reformation-Diarmaid-MacCulloch/dp/014303538X/ref=pd_bbs_2?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1200808706&sr=8-2 excerpt and text search]
*McGonigle, Thomas D.,  and James F. Quigley. ''A history of the Christian Tradition: From Its Jewish Orgins to the Reformation'' (1988); ''A History of the Christian Tradition, Vol. II: From the Reformation to the Present'' (1996) [http://www.amazon.com/History-Christian-Tradition-Vol-Reformation/dp/0809136481/ref=sr_1_15?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1200808706&sr=8-15 excerpt and text search vol 2]
*Noll, Mark A. ''The Old Religion in a New World: The History of North American Christianity'' (2001) [http://www.amazon.com/Old-Religion-New-World-Christianity/dp/0802849482/ref=sr_1_11?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1200823548&sr=8-11 excerpt and text search]
*Pelikan, Jaroslav. ''Christian Tradition: A History of the Development of Doctrine'' (5 vol 1975-91) [http://www.amazon.com/Christian-Tradition-Development-Doctrine-Medieval/dp/0226653757/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1201083460&sr=8-1 excerpt and text search v. 3, 600 AD -1300]]; [http://www.amazon.com/Christian-Tradition-Development-Reformation-1300-1700/dp/0226653773/ref=sr_1_4?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1201083460&sr=8-4 excerpt and text search vol 4, 1300-1700]; [http://www.amazon.com/Christian-Tradition-History-Development-Doctrine/dp/0226653803/ref=sr_1_3?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1201083460&sr=8-3 excerpt and text search vol 5, 1700-present]
*''New Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge'' (1911), major sources of older scholarly articles; mainline Protestant perspective:
:*[http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/encyc01.toc.html Vol. 1: Aachen - Basilians]
:*[http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/encyc02.toc.html Vol. 2: Basilica - Chambers]
:*[http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/encyc03.toc.html Vol. 3: Chamier - Draendorf]
:*[http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/encyc04.toc.html Vol. 4: Draeseke - Goa]
:*[http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/encyc05.toc.html Vol. 5: Goar - Innocent]
:*[http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/encyc06.toc.html Vol. 6: Innocents - Liudger]
:*[http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/encyc07.toc.html Vol. 7: Liutprand - Moralities]
:*[http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/encyc08.toc.html Vol. 8: Morality - Petersen]
:*[http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/encyc09.toc.html Vol. 9: Petri - Reuchlin]
:*[http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/encyc10.toc.html Vol. 10: Reutsch - Son]
:*[http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/encyc11.toc.html Vol. 11: Son of Man - Tremellius]
:*[http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/encyc12.toc.html Vol. 12: Trench - Zwingli]
:*[http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/encyc13.toc.html Vol. 13: Index]

===Primary sources===
*Placher, William C. ''Readings in the History of Christian Theology, Volume 2: From the Reformation to the Present'' (1988) [http://www.amazon.com/Readings-History-Christian-Theology-Reformation/dp/0664240585/ref=sr_1_24?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1200809912&sr=8-24 excerpt and text search] 

==External links==
*[http://people.bu.edu/wwildman/WeirdWildWeb/courses/mwt/dictionary/mwt_themes.htm#Index%20of%20Articles Boston Collaborative Encyclopedia of Western Theology], biographies and analysis of major theologians and religious philosophers.