{{subpages}}
{{TOC|right}}
'''Glenn Beck''' (1964-) is a U.S. [[political opinion broadcasting|political opinion broadcaster]] and author, with a show on [[Fox News]], and his own website, books and national tours. He is strongly identified with [[American conservatism]], and has started a movement called the [[9-12 Project]], strongly critical of liberal ideas and suspicious of large government.

Among Fox opinion commentators, Beck differentiates himself as a highly emotional "revivalist in a troubled land", with an apocalyptic vision, as opposed to [[Bill O'Reilly]] as an "outsider" and [[Sean Hannity]] as an ideologue. Conservative writer [[David Frum]] called  Beck's success the “...product of the collapse of conservatism as an organized political force, and the rise of conservatism as an alienated cultural sensibility. It’s a show for people who feel they belong to an embattled minority that is disenfranchised and cut off." He calls himself an entertainer that challenges his critics: "I’m a rodeo clown...It takes great skill.”<ref name=NYT2009-03-30>{{citation
 | date = 30 March 2009
 | author = Brian Stelter and Bill Carter
 | title = Fox News’s Mad, Apocalyptic, Tearful Rising Star
 | journal = [[New York Times]]
 | url = http://www.nytimes.com/2009/03/30/business/media/30beck.html?pagewanted=print}}</ref>

[[Tom Rosenstiel]], of the [[Project for Excellence in Journalism]], speaks of his appeal in historical terms: “There was a lot of radio evangelism during the Depression. People were frustrated and frightened. There are a lot of scary parallels now.” 
==Early life==
There is little question that he started broadcasting at the age of 13. <ref name=About>{{citation
 | title = About the Glenn Beck Program
 | url = http://www.glennbeck.com/content/program/about/
 | publisher = Glenn Beck Program}}</ref>  There are, however, various versions of his early life. He grew up in Mount Vernon, [[Washington]], a farm town that, in the 1960s, had a considerable counterculture component, although his father, William Beck, was known as a conventional bakery owner. Quoted by Salon.com, Beck said it was ethnically homogeneous: "the source of his lingering discomfort around Jews and other ethnic minorities. 'I'm the whitest guy you will ever meet," Beck never tires of saying. "The first time I saw an African-American, my dad had to tell me to stop staring.'" The family was active in the local Catholic church, and he and his sisters attended religious schools.  <ref name=Salon2009-09-21>{{citation | date = 21 September 2009
 | title = The making of Glenn Beck: His roots, from the alleged suicide of his mom to Top 40 radio to the birth of the morning zoo (Part 1 of 3)
 | url = http://www.salon.com/news/feature/2009/09/21/glenn_beck/index.html
 | author = Alexander Zaitchik | journal = Salon.com}}</ref>
===Mother's death===
===Redemption===
The theme of redemption recurs in his own, and other accounts, of his career. According to his website, at age 30, he "was consumed by alcoholism and drug addiction. Coming to terms with his past and staying sober shifted his life direction." <ref name=About />His second wife, Tania, required him to convert to Mormonism before they were wed.  

He suffers from [[attention deficit hyperactivity disorder]], and credits religion and [[Alcoholics Anonymous]] for his stability. <ref name=NNDB>{{citation
 | url = http://www.nndb.com/people/809/000049662/
 | journal = NNDB
 | title = Glenn Beck}}</ref>
==On-air comments==
In a skit with a woman wearing a mask of [[U.S. Speaker of the House]] [[Nancy Pelosi]],  on 6 August 2009, he spoke of poisoning her. <blockquote> So, Speaker Pelosi, I just wanted to — you gonna drink your wine? Are you blind? Do those eyes not work? There you — I want you to drink it now. Drink it. Drink it. Drink it.

I really just wanted to thank you for having me over here to wine country. You know, to be invited, I thought I had to be a major Democratic donor or a longtime friend of yours, which I’m not.

By the way, I put poison in your — no, I — I look forward to all the policy discussions that we’re supposed to have — you know, on health care, energy reform, and the economy.<ref name=MM>{{citation
 | title = Beck jokes about "put(ting) poison" in Nancy Pelosi's wine
 | journal = [[MediaMatters]]
 | date = 6 August 2009
 | url = http://mediamatters.org/mmtv/200908060037
}}</ref></blockquote>
On a [[CNN]] interview of Rep. [[Keith Ellison]] ([[U.S. Democratic Party|D-]][[Minnesota]]), the first Muslim elected to the [[U.S. House of Representatives]], he questioned Ellison's loyalty to the United States. Beck said, with respect to Iraq, "You are saying, "Let`s cut and run." And I have to tell you, I have been nervous about this interview with you, because what I feel like saying is, "Sir, prove to me that you are not working with our enemies." And I know you`re not. I`m not accusing you of being an enemy, but that`s the way I feel, and I think a lot of Americans will feel that way."<ref>{{citation
 | url = http://transcripts.cnn.com/TRANSCRIPTS/0611/14/gb.01.html
 | title = What Should be Done with Iran? First Muslim Congressman Speaks Out
 | author = Glenn Beck
 | date = 14 November 2006
 | journal = CNN
}}</ref>

He mused about killing left-wing filmmaker [[Michael Moore]] on his show of 17 May 2005.<blockquote>I'm thinking about killing Michael Moore, and I'm wondering if I could kill him myself, or if I would need to hire somebody to do it. No, I think I could. I think he could be looking me in the eye, you know, and I could just be choking the life out -- is this wrong? I stopped wearing my What Would Jesus -- band -- Do, and I've lost all sense of right and wrong now. I used to be able to say, "Yeah, I'd kill Michael Moore," and then I'd see the little band: What Would Jesus Do? And then I'd realize, "Oh, you wouldn't kill Michael Moore. Or at least you wouldn't choke him to death." And you know, well, I'm not sure.<ref name=MM2005-05-18>{{citation
 | title = Radio host Glenn Beck "thinking about killing Michael Moore"
 | date = 18 May 2005
 | journal = [[MediaMatters]]
 | url = http://mediamatters.org/research/200505180008?is_gsa=1&final=1}}</ref></blockquote>
==9-12 Project==
{{main|9-12 Project}}
He created the [[9-12 Project]] as a movement whose name invokes U.S. response to the [[9-11 Attacks]], <blockquote>On 9/10 we were burying our heads in the sand or we were playing politics. It was about Republicans or Democrats. On 9/11 we were freaking out and no one knew who attacked us, where did this come from, what is this. On 9/12 no one in the government had to tell us what to do. We just did it.<ref name=Announce>{{citation
 | title = Glenn Beck: The 9/12 Project 				
 | author = Glenn Beck
 | journal = The Glenn Beck Program
 | date = 17 March 2009 
 | url = http://www.glennbeck.com/content/articles/article/198/22802/
}}</ref></blockquote>
According to his open letter of November 2009, Beck said, <ref name=Letter>{{citation
 | title  = 11/23: Glenn Beck Reveals The Plan in Open Letter
 | author = Glenn Beck
 | url =http://www.the912project.com/category/the-plan/
 | date = 23 November 2009
 | publisher = 9-12 Project}}</ref> "Today, I have stopped looking for a leader to show us the way out because I have come to realize that the only one who can truly save our country… is us." On his show, he said "Coming this January, my whole approach changes on this program. This next year is going to be critical, and I think it's going to change and I think we are going to set it right, at least set our course right. And if that means the Democrats or the Republicans are destroyed along the way, well, good. Good. " <ref name=Politico2009-11-21>{{citation
 | title =  Beck's plan: Rally followers, sell books
 | author = Kenneth P. Vogel
 | date = 21 November 2009 | journal = Politico 
 | url = http://dyn.politico.com/printstory.cfm?uuid=18BB9B93-18FE-70B2-A88A18A5253A4258}}</ref>

The project has no explicit funding, but its website content is produced by Beck's production company, [[Mercury Radio Arts]], and hosted on [[Fox News]]' servers. There is considerable synergy between this and the [[Tea Party Movement]]. <ref name=AP2009-09-12>{{citation
 | journal = Associated Press
 | title = Tea Party Washington D.C. PHOTOS: Conservative Protesters Rally Against Big Government
 | date = 12 September 2009
 | url = http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2009/09/12/taxpayer-march-on-washing_n_284477.html}}</ref> The project website, indeed, quotes analysis of an upcoming Republican senatorial primary as a confrontation between the Republican establishment and the tea party.<ref name=TheHill>{{citation
 | title = Republican's exit could clear the way for Tea Party vs. GOP incumbent Bennett
 | author = Aaron Blake | date = 11 November 2009 | journal = The Hill
 | url = http://thehill.com/homenews/campaign/67429-challengers-exit-could-clear-way-for-tea-party-vs-bennett}}</ref>

Some of Beck's announcements also tie with tours publicizing his book, ''Arguing with Idiots''.<ref name=Politico2009-11-20>{{citation
 | title = Beck to announce 'big plan' for 2010
 | author = Kenneth P. Vogel
 | date = 20 November 2009 | journal = Politico
 | url =http://dyn.politico.com/printstory.cfm?uuid=137C9ABE-18FE-70B2-A88E1BC3F0B684D4}}</ref> Critics have said that Beck's change in direction, from general encouragement of his listeners to organize to active participation in action, tie to publicity for his book. Beck's direct participation in political activities may put the project under the jurisdiction of campaign finance law. <ref name=Politico2009-11-21 />  Further complicating the political finance situation are campaigns for office by people associated with the project., such as [[Dan Eichenbaum]] in [[North Carolina]]'s 11th Congressional District<ref name=PRNW2009-12-09>, {{citation
 | url  = http://www.pr.com/press-release/198123
 | title = Founding Member of 9-12 Project Stands for Election to Congress
 | date = 9 December 2009
 | journal = PR.com}}</ref> running against incumbent Democrat [[Heath Shuler]].<ref name=DrDan>{{citation
 | url = http://drdan4congress.com/about/
 | title = About
 | publisher = Dr. Dan for Congress}}</ref>
==Advertiser boycott==
His calling called [[Barack Obama]] a racist over the [[Henry Louis Gates, Jr.]] arrest <ref name=Politico2009-07-28>{{citation
 | date = 28 July 2009
 | title = Fox's Beck: Obama is 'a racist'
 | author = [[Michael Calderone]] 
 | journal = Politico 
 | url= http://www.politico.com/blogs/michaelcalderone/0709/Foxs_Beck_Obama_is_a_racist.html}}</ref> has triggered a boycott by some advertisers.  According to [[MediaMatters]], 80 advertisers reportedly dropped their ads since he called President Obama a "racist" who has a "deep-seated hatred of white people." <ref name=MM2009-12-15> {{citation
 | title = So who's still advertising on on Beck? 
 | journal = [[MediaMatters]]
 | date = 15 December 2009
 | url = http://mediamatters.org/blog/200912150048}}</ref> Writing in [[The Atlantic]], [[Conor Clarke]] does not see this as a free speech issue: "It seems to me that the right to free speech does not give you the right to massive corporate underwriting. Glenn Beck can defend "the white culture" and call Obama a "racist" in poverty and in private." Clarke said he can accept, however, the Fox statement that "'While the advertising boycott has generated substantial media coverage', Fox News said it has not impacted the network's revenues or Beck's audience. 'The advertisers referenced have all moved their spots from Beck to other programs on the network so there has been no revenue lost,'"<ref name=Atlantic2009-08-25>{{citation
 | date = 25 August 2009 | author = Conor Clarke
 | title = Why Hasn't the Glenn Beck Boycott Hurt Fox News? | journal = [[The Atlantic]]
 | url = http://politics.theatlantic.com/2009/08/why_hasnt_the_glenn_beck_boycott_hurt_fox_news.php}}</ref>

Supporters argue that this is left-wing bias by a "left-wing African American advocacy group named colorofchange.org. The group, founded by self-described communist Van Jones, now the Obama Administration’s ‘green jobs’ czar, claims to promote inclusion of minorities in the process of developing an environmentally-sound economy." A website, DefendGlenn.com, is encouraging a counter-boycott of firms that have dropped their advertising. <ref name=ORE>{{citation
 | date = 17 August 2009
 | title = Glenn Beck supporters fight back against left-wing boycott
 | journal = Orlando Republican Examiner, in Boston Globe
 | url = http://www.examiner.com/x-5325-Orlando-Republican-Examiner~y2009m8d17-Glenn-Beck-supporters-fight-back-against-leftwing-boycott}}</ref>
==Conflict of interest allegations==
His current advertisers do include gold sellers Goldline International, which offers investing in precious metals as a hedge against catastrophic economic events. Its website calls him an endorser,<ref>{{citation
 | url = http://www.goldline.com/d/index.html?id=544&utm_source=glennbeck.com&utm_medium=banner&utm_campaign=beckbanner
 | publisher = Goldline International
 | title = Goldline is Glenn Beck's Choice for Gold}}</ref> and product endorsements is generally forbidden for Fox broadcast personnel. [[Joel Cheatwood]], senior vice president for development for Fox, said an exception was made for him: Joel Cheatwood, senior vice president for development. "When we hired Glenn at Fox News, we hired him with the understanding that he had a well-established, burgeoning radio business, and we had to be accepting of certain elements of that." <ref name=DF2009-12-07>{{citation
 | url = http://www.dailyfinance.com/2009/12/07/thars-gold-in-them-shills-fox-raps-glenn-becks-endorsement-de/
 |title = Thar's gold in them shills! Fox raps Glenn Beck's endorsement deal
 |author = Jeff Bercovici | journal = Daily Finance
 | date = 7 December 2009}}</ref>
==References==
{{reflist|2}}