{{subpages}}

'''Google Inc.''' is an [[internet]] search engine company that was co-founded by [[Larry Page]] and [[Sergey Brin]]. It is currently the most popular search engine on the internet. Among the services offered by Google are Google Mail, Google Video, and Google Maps. Google Inc. is also the owner of several other websites and companies, for example Blogger, [[YouTube]], and [[DoubleClick]].

==History==
The history of Google has been detailed.<ref name="isbn1-59184-141-0">{{cite book |author=John Battelle |title=The Search: How Google and Its Rivals Rewrote the Rules of Business and Transformed Our Culture |publisher=Portfolio Trade |location= |year=2006 |pages= |isbn=1-59184-141-0 |oclc= |doi=}}</ref>

===Searching===
Brin and Page published their article, "The anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual Web search engine", in 1998.<ref>{{Cite journal | doi = 10.1016/S0169-7552(98)00110-X | issn = 0169-7552 | volume = 30 | issue = 1-7 | pages = 107-117 | last = Brin | first = Sergey | coauthors = Lawrence Page | title = The anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual Web search engine | journal = Computer Networks and ISDN Systems | accessdate = 2008-12-17 | date = 1998-04 | url = http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B6TYT-3WRC342-2N/2/63e7d8fb6a64027a0c15e6ae3e402889}}</ref> Their [[patent]] for [[PageRank]] was filed in 1998 and issued in 2001.<ref>Page L. (2001) Method for node ranking in a linked database. [http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?patentnumber=6285999 United States Patent Office] [http://www.google.com/patents?q=patent%3A6285999 Google Patents] {{US patent|6285999}}</ref>

====Advertising====
Over 40 patents related to advertising have been assigned to Google.<ref name="urlPatent Database Search Results: AN/Google AND (TTL/advert$ OR ABST/advert$ OR SPEC/advert$) in US Patent Collection">{{cite web |url=http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=0&f=S&l=50&d=PTXT&RS=(AN%2FGoogle+AND+((TTL%2Fadvert%24+OR+ABST%2Fadvert%24)+OR+SPEC%2Fadvert%24))&Refine=Refine+Search&Refine=Refine+Search&Query=AN%2FGoogle+AND+(TTL%2Fadvert%24+OR+ABST%2Fadvert%24+OR+SPEC%2Fadvert%24) |title=Patent Database Search Results: AN/Google AND (TTL/advert$ OR ABST/advert$ OR SPEC/advert$) in US Patent Collection |author= |authorlink= |coauthors= |date= |format= |work= |publisher=United States Patent Office |pages= |language= |archiveurl= |archivedate= |quote= |accessdate=2009-06-20}}</ref>

====AdWords====
AdWords ([http://adwords.google.com/ website])is for sponsors to advertise their products on Google's advertising network. Sponsors pay by bidding on a pay-per-click model. In addition, bids are awarded based on the advertiser's clickthrough rate. Google introduced AdWords in October, 2000.<ref>Karp, Scott (May 27th, 2008) [http://publishing2.com/2008/05/27/google-adwords-a-brief-history-of-online-advertising-innovation/ Google AdWords: A Brief History Of Online Advertising Innovation] Publishing 2.0</ref>

===AdSense===
AdSense is for web publishers to earn income by hosting advertisements on their websites ([http://adsense.google.com website]). Google's [[patent]] for [[AdSense]] was filed in 2003 and issued in 2006.<ref>Anderson D, et al. (2006) Serving advertisements based on content . [http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?patentnumber=7136875 United States Patent Office] [http://www.google.com/patents?q=patent%3A7136875 Google Patents] {{US patent|7136875}}</ref>
Yahoo had a lawsuit against Google for patent infringement that resulted in  Yahoo licensing to Google US Patent 6269361 ({{US patent|6269361}}) and other patents.<ref name="urlGoogle, Yahoo bury the legal hatchet - CNET News">{{cite web |url=http://news.cnet.com/Google%2C-Yahoo-bury-the-legal-hatchet/2100-1024_3-5302421.html?tag=mncol |title=Google, Yahoo bury the legal hatchet |author=Olsen S |authorlink= |coauthors= |date=2004 |format= |work= |publisher=CNET News |pages= |language= |archiveurl= |archivedate= |quote= |accessdate=2009-06-20}}</ref>

==Controversies==
The Google Book Search Library Project, in which millions of books from libraries will be scanned and made searchable on the Web, has led to controversy and legal action. In support of Google's mission to "organize the world's information," the Google Book Search program is designed to digitize printed book content so that it may be searched and retrieved via Google's search engine.  The program has two facets—one that involves publishers, which has not been controversial, and one that involves libraries, which has. The University of Michigan has committed to allowing Google to scan its entire print and journal collection.  Publishers are suing Google for copyright infringement, while Google claims their use falls under the fair use privilege of the Copyright Act.<ref>Baksik, Corinna. (2006) "Fair Use or Exploitation? The Google Book Search Controversy," ''Libraries and the Academy''- Volume 6, Number 4, October 2006, pp. 399-415 in [[Project Muse]]</ref> 


Google has agreed to censor results for queries made from China. Google has decided to do so to stop [[China]] from hindering Chinese user searches (blocking Google or substantially slowing down the result display). Google has agreed to block content that the Chinese government deems unacceptable. <ref>''Fox News.com'', "[http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,182695,00.html China's Google Search Engine to Be Censored]", [Associated Press], January 25, 2006.</ref>. 

[[Google Reader]] now automatically allows contacts a person has in a [[Gmail]] account to what feeds are subscribed.<ref>''Profy'', "[http://www.profy.com/2007/12/27/google-reader-privacy-mess/ Don't Be... What Was That Again? We Seem to Have Forgotten]", Cyndy Aleo-Carreira, December 27th, 2007.</ref>.

Google [[cookie]]s are criticized by the [[World Privacy Forum]] and others. They expire automatically after two years, but cookies will not be erased unless a person does not visit any Google sites for two years. <ref>''USA Today'', "[http://www.usatoday.com/tech/news/2007-07-19-google-cookies-privacy_N.htm Google's cookie policy good for privacy?]", Anick Jesdanun, July 19, 2007.</ref>.

==References==
<references/>

== External links ==
* [http://www.google.com Google]
* [http://www.google.com/corporate/ Official corporate website]
* [http://labs.google.com/ Google labs]