'''Homosexuality''' is the term used to describe the state of those people who are attracted romantically or sexually to other people of the same [[gender]]. The word 'homosexual' was first used to describe such a person in writings in Germany in the 19th century.

__TOC__
==History==
Whilst there existed people attracted to their own gender long before the coining of a term used to describe this state, there existed no specific word in general usage, and accepted by academics, as a term to describe those for whom their own gender represents the predominant object of romantic or sexual desire.

In the 1860s, an Austrian born Hungarian writer, [[Karl Maria Kertbeny]], used the term 'homosexual' for the first time in [[Berlin]] in [[anthropology|anthropological]] writings about people for whom same gender attraction defined their sexual orientation.<ref>[http://www.gayhistory.com/rev2/words/homosexual.htm Gayhistory.com] Retrieved: July 29, 2007</ref>

As a result of Kertbeny's writings, now generally accepted terms such as [[heterosexual]] and [[bisexual]] also became a part of general discourse.

Historically many homosexual people sought to conceal their [[sexuality]] from others, however there have been examples in history where that has either not been the case, or not been the way that events have transpired for them. 

For example, [[Oscar Wilde]] was a prominent homosexual writer (although he did marry) who was imprisoned at the start of the 20th century for offending public decency.<ref>[http://www.law.umkc.edu/faculty/projects/ftrials/wilde/wildeaccount.html The Trials of Oscar Wilde.] Douglas O. Linder. University of Missouri-Kansas City School of Law. Retrieved: July 29, 2007</ref> It was Wilde who first referred to homosexual attraction, during his court trial, as "the love that dare not speak it's name".<ref>[http://www.bombaybar.com/archives/books/the_trial_of_oscar_wilde.php The Trial of Oscar Wilde.] Book review by Bombay Bar Asssociation. Retrieved: July 29, 2007</ref> 

Many people have chosen to seek not to be known as homosexual, for fear of being not accepted or becoming ostracized within society. 

During the 1920s and 1930s, German homosexuals were quite often open with others in society about their homosexuality.

Homosexuals were amongst the groups nominated by the National-Socialist German Workers Party, known commonly as the [[Nazi]]s, included for internment in work camps in [[Europe]] during the [[WWII|Second World War]]. 

Other groups of people included in what became referred to by historians as [[concentration camp]]s at this time included [[jews]], [[gypsy|gypsies]] and political opponents.   

The various groups in such camps were each assigned a symbol according to their race, religion and/or, in the case of homosexuals, their [[sexuality]].

The symbol assigned to be worn by homosexuals in the camps was a pink triangle, made of one half of the two triangles used to form the [[Star of David]] on the armband that was worn by Jewish internees. The triangle of cloth was dyed [[pink]] and affixed to armbands, worn by all prisoners in the camps, with the point of the triangle pointing downwards. This pink triangle symbol remains a powerful symbol that is now used by [[gay community]] groups around the world, in a reclaiming of what had clearly been invented initially purely as an identity mechanism of homosexual oppression.

==Homosexuality today==
Since around the mid-20th century, homosexual people have sometimes been referred to by various [[slang]] terms including "[[gay]]", a term sometimes used to refer exclusively to male homosexuals, and also sometimes more broadly used to refer to [[GLBT]] people. Female homosexuals are referred to as [[lesbian]]s or [[gay]] women. 

Many people now do not seek to conceal their homosexuality and are said to be 'out of the closet' as openly gay - with family, friends and at work - although not all are, and certainly this is not possible for homosexual people in all countries.

Homosexual people today experience varying conditions of social and legal acceptance around the world. In some countries such as the [[United Kingdom]] for example, gays and lesbians can enter into [[Civil Partnerships]] which are seen as equivalent in most respects to [[marriage]]. In some countries such as the [[Netherlands]], [[Belgium]], [[Spain]] and [[Canada]], [[gay marriage]] is allowed. 

Whilst the topic of homosexuality is one that has become more acceptable in certain countries, and homosexual people find greater levels of acceptance, there remains laws in certain countries that punish by imprisonment people proved or thought to be homosexual. 

There are also groups in some societies around the world who do not accept homosexuality and expressly distinguish homosexual people from homosexuality. For example, some [[Christian]] groups do this, and some [[Muslim]]s consider [[Islam]] to be against both homosexuality and homosexual people.  

In the [[USA]], and around the world, there has been controversy over the ordination of an openly gay man, [[Gene Robinson]], as an [[Anglican]] bishop. <ref>[http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/comment/faith/article2155148.ece Without gay priests Church would be lost claims Bishop Gene.] July 27, 2007. Times Online. Retrieved: July 29, 2007</ref>

The [[business]] sector has increasingly targeted gay consumers with some [[company|companies]] now having dedicated [[gay marketing]] campaigns to target homosexual customers as a [[niche market]] group.

==References==
<div class="references-small" style="-moz-column-count:3; column-count:3;">
<references/>
</div>

==Related topics==
*[[Gay]]
*[[Gay community]]
*[[Gay marketing]]
*[[GLBT]]
*[[Lesbian]]
*[[Stonewall riots]]

==Notes and links==

[[Category:CZ Live]]
[[Category:History Workgroup]]
[[Category:Sociology Workgroup]]