{{subpages}}
{{TOC|right}}
'''Willis Allison Carto''' (July 17, 1926–) is an American far-right activist, who has, throughout his career, promoted [[conspiracy theory|conspiracy theories]] featuring [[antisemitism]]; he also has questioned the role of the [[Trilateral Commission]] and the [[Council on Foreign Relations]].<ref name=ADL>{{citation
 | url = http://www.adl.org/learn/ext_us/carto.asp?LEARN_Cat=Extremism&LEARN_SubCat=Extremism_in_America&xpicked=2&item=carto
 | title = Willis Carto
 | publisher = [[Anti-Defamation League]]}}</ref> He is affiliated with the ''[[American Free Press]]'', The ''[[Barnes Review]]'',   [[Institute for Historical Review]] (which promotes [[Holocaust denial]]), and, in the past, affiliated with [[Congress of Freedom]], [[Liberty and Property]], [[Liberty Lobby]], [[John Birch Society]], [[National Youth Alliance]], and the [[Populist Party (1984)]]
==Motivations==
He is listed as an extremist individual by the [[Anti-Defamation League]] (ADL). According to the ADL, the transforming events of his life came from reading the racist theory works of [[Francis Parker Yockey]]; [[Revilo Oliver]] introduced Carto's remembrance of Yockey.  In the early 1950s, he served as director of the Congress of Freedom, "which sought to build coalitions between racists and hard-right libertarians, and as executive secretary of Liberty and Property (which he founded).", and was editor of '' Right'', "an information clearinghouse for racist and anti-Semitic activities". <ref name=ADL/> Also motivating him was a leftist historian, [[Harry Elmer Barnes]], who was, according to [[Murray Rothbard]], "the father and the catalyst for all of World War II revisionism," <ref>{{citation
 | url = http://www.lewrockwell.com/rothbard/rothbard165.html
 | title = Harry Elmer Barnes, R.I.P. | year = 1968
 | author = Murray Rothbard
 | journal = LEFT AND RIGHT: A Journal of Libertarian Thought}}</ref> who believed the Holocaust was a pretext to involve the U.S. in a European war.
==Liberty Lobby==
In 1956, he founded [[Liberty Lobby]], described by [[Mother Jones]] magazine as a secretive, "ultra-conservative pressure group... estimated to be a multimillion-dollar operation"<ref name="mjones">Zina Klapper, "The Force of Willis Carto", [[Mother Jones]] April 1981, p. 6</ref>. 

The group published a newspaper entitled ''The Spotlight'' (subtitled "The Voice of the American Majority"). ''The Spotlight'' often included material that was anti-Semitic and racist, and was part of Carto's broader media appeal. He briefly owned, for example, part of [[Resistance Records]], the leading distributor of white power hate music.  

The Liberty Lobby closed operations in 2001.
==Institute for Historical Review==
{{main|Institute for Historical Review}}

==Populist Party==
==Barnes Review==
He started the ''Barnes Review'' in 1994. At its 2002 conference, [[William Lind]] of the [[Free Congress Foundation]], who decidedly is not a Holocaust denier, blamed "political correctness" and other evils on so-called "cultural Marxists..."These guys were all Jewish."  The publication, in 2008, has, including in articles signed by Carto, emphasized [[Christian Identity]].<ref name=SPLC-Barnes>{{citation
 | url = http://www.splcenter.org/get-informed/intelligence-files/groups/barnes-review
 | title = Barnes Review
 | publisher = [[Southern Poverty Law Center]]}}</ref>

He has written, in the ''Review'', on the basis for his "Holocaust revisionism", saying his interest started with a 14 June 1959 letter to the editor of ''Our Sunday Visitor'',  by Steven F. Pinter, "who claimed to have been in Dachau for 17 months after the war as a U.S. government attorney and said there were no gas chambers there or in any other detention camp in Germany." He went on to describe [[Paul Rassinier]] as the first serious scholar. <ref>{{citation
 | url = http://www.barnesreview.org/html/revisionism.html
 | title = A Brief History of Holocaust Revisionism
 | author = Willis A. Carto}}</ref>
==References==
{{reflist|2}}